on which was the initial question raised
by mr. Lane what is the function of the
CIA if any in a society and that has not
been addressed and I would like that
question to be faced before we move
along would you make a comment on that
and then mr. Lane there is an
organization in Washington called the
Brookings Institution has a great deal
of prestige puts out regular reports
which have to do with the conditions
that might be threats to the United
States I think it was last November they
put out that annual report and they said
the energy crisis does this and that any
other but that year as in every previous
year the Brookings Institute said that
the threat the potential threat at the
top of the list against the well-being
of the United States was the possibility
of a conflict with the Soviet Union we
are now going through a period called
ATandT everyone feels differently it
seems about the time some people think
it's great some people are distrustful
but nevertheless we're going through the
period and I think most people believe
it's a heck of a lot better than things
were before however the Brookings
Institution also put out a report about
the same time which showed that since
World War two American presidents have
elected on something like 224 occasions
to use US military might or the threat
of it sometimes the American presidents
decided to send the troops into the
Dominican Republic sometimes they just
sailed up and down a coast but on an
average of once a month since World War
two they decided to do that looks to me
like that records improving given those
conditions I think we have to have an
in service to know what others are doing
I guess I sum it up this way to American
tourists went to the zoo in Moscow and
they looked in the cage and they saw a
bear and a lamb in the same cage and
they said well this is amazing we've
never seen anything like this so they
call over the guard and said what is
this the bear in the lamb in the same
cage and the guards at oldest is to
prove that coexistence is possible this
is to prove that the tonked can work and
the tourists said well it really is
amazing and the guard looked around to
be sure that no one was listening and he
said of course we have to change the
lamb every day I think in the final
analysis that our country has to be one
of those prepared to watch out for the
Lambs of the world in a sense we the
American people are among the Lambs of
the world
I think Dick Gregory not a scholar in
this field in bitly but I think summed
it up really best he said what more can
you say about the CIA after you find out
that they released live bacteria in the
New York City subway system to see which
direction they would go in and how fast
because we always thought that
Intelligence Agency of an enemy would do
that to us during wartime
then we found it was our own
Intelligence Agency doing it to us
during peacetime
what eyeball should say I know I would
not well yeah I would abolish this CIA
and I would and I would abolish the Nazi
clique within the Central Intelligence
Agency which has for so many years
corrupted the rights of the American
people but of course there has to be an
intelligence organization and it should
be an intelligence organization which is
not the kind of intelligence
organization which would service a
totalitarian state achieve it should be
a toad a intelligence organization
designed to serve the needs of a
Democratic Society which means no
efforts to kill people throughout the
world obviously an organization which
has no jurisdiction whatever to act with
in this country just like to read a very
short statement by before mr. Klein fled
this morning
he said you may recall that the only
defector from the CIA was Philip Agee I
don't know what that word defective
means the victim Marchetti hasn't been
too kind to the CIA's the highest
executive that organization speaking
about it frankly this is George O'Toole
is the chief of the problems analysis
branch we should have an organization an
intelligence organization so that when
someone resigns from it a man who's
exercised a very important high position
he doesn't feel compelled to write what
George O'Toole has written I didn't call
Phillips to ask him the name of the
publisher I just filled that in for him
I wouldn't say the CIA assassinated
President Kennedy either not because I'm
convinced as Phillips's that the agency
didn't do it but because like most other
present and former CIA employees I
simply don't know some years ago I wrote
that I found the proposition the CIA
killed President Kennedy to be
unbelievable how unbelievable about as
unbelievable as the idea that the CIA
hired the Mafia to kill people that it
conspired to assassinate the leaders of
foreign countries of whom it disapproved
that has spiked innocent unsuspecting
people's coffee with LSD then cover up
the reason they jumped from windows that
it stockpiled deadly poison in violation
of a presidential order that an
illegally opened mail and otherwise
spied on Americans etc of course to
claim ignorance of these things is to
risk sounding like the piano player in
the whorehouse who professed not to know
what went on upstairs we should have an
intelligence organization so that when
the people the honorable people who
retired from it they do not feel
compelled to write about their years of
service in this fashion one final
question the gentleman the blue time
I've been trying to put this all
together it's not exactly a strange area
for me but aback right after World War
two ended before the Army Intelligence
disbanded in the Orient one major
general was try was they attempted to
recruit him for the CIA and he said no
I'm going home and raised my children
and the clinching argument for the CIA
recruiter
well you better come go with us because
in 25 years
we intend to run the United States now
put together that 25 years Nixon and the
rather dubious reputation of the CIA
what happened or has it happened I infer
from your question has the CIA really
got to the point where it does run
things as was depicted on the television
series the other night if the CIA had
the power to run this country would it
really have let itself fall into this
low disrepute that it's in now well what
happened in the 25 years since someone
talked I'm convinced that a great many
decent Americans men and women 1/3 of
the people who work at CI are women were
in a profession which has been practiced
as long as the well it's the second
oldest profession and they have believed
that they were doing a job that was
necessary and they did it because their
government asked them to do those things
there are a lot of them now that believe
the things that they did were wrong but
it doesn't do any good to come with
tears in your eyes but what happened was
that they got into trouble because
American presidents and American
secretaries of state adopted policies
that called for covert action and secret
operations it seems to me it's that set
of
now in all fairness and I have asked
those speakers it seems to me that each
gentleman should have the right to make
one final statement it will never be
final but at least it will terminate
this discussion and since you went first
maybe you should make the statement and
then he follow or would you whichever
you prefer do we mustn't flip another
coin oh why don't you go first all right
earlier I asked two questions I haven't
received a direct answer or even an
indirect answer and they remain for you
mr. Phillips what do you know of the
relationship between clay Shaw and the
Central Intelligence Agency since it has
been established beyond question that
there was a long continuing relationship
between clay Shaw and Lee Harvey Oswald
if you don't know anything about that
how can you tell us that there is no
relationship at all between Lee Harvey
Oswald and the Central Intelligence
Agency
are you aware of the fact that the CIA
has now released documents showing a
close continuing relationship with Clay
Shaw going back to 1955 eight years
before the assassination of President
Kennedy
are you willing to way waive the rights
that accrue to you through the claim
that I am a public figure if I wish to
bring an action against you for the
false fam'ly Tory material that you have
read to this audience through the
newspapers of the Washington Post in the
New York Times those are two questions I
have not finished those just two
questions that I'd like to offer to you
I'd like to conclude the way I began and
that is by thanking University of
Southern California which seems to me to
be a rather unlikely place for this the
first historic change take place
know I've been here 20 years that's
marvelous that's really good it just
seems to me this unusual this is the
first place with such a debate would
take place
given the look at the Board of Trustees
at the USC and I think it's marvelous
I think so a remarkable thing but the
debate and the exchange is taking place
I want to thank you particularly doctor
for the fairness with which you have
moderated this program and if on
occasion some of us myself first of all
or Tito geraci or perhaps dr. Ellsberg
later or others who have been maligned
and victimized by the illegal unfair
tactics of these intelligence agencies
show a bit of emotion about it I hope
you will forgive us our emotion there
were three parts to your question about
place Shaw first of all no I never knew
him I never knew of any CIA connection
with him and if there are a series of
documents proving that I was not aware
of it the second part from that point oh
and I didn't quite understand more
doesn't that what does that prove about
Lee Harvey Oswald there are CIA
documents which show a relationship
between the CIA I'm quite sure there's
no question but you're not familiar with
that how can you tell us that there is
no relationship whatsoever between Lee
Harvey Oswald
which part the second part that I'm in
reference to the relationship with
yes but I thought that the garrison
thing had been completely discredited
yeah I know that we've shown you the
documents I could show you the documents
which the CIA
thoroughly describe the garrison
investigation but that doesn't they're
right but that does not dispose of the
question and the question which the
jurors passed on as I said earlier every
single juror every one of them who heard
the testimony at the white Citizens
Council the black members of the
Congress of racial equality the others
involvement really unlikely
conspiratorial group who all testify
about the close continuing relationship
ice the CIA's efforts to disparage Jimmy
garrison and to discredit him that body
of evidence is a very important body of
evidence remains they're totally
unrefuted by the CIA by mr. Shaw add to
that the CIA's admission now mr. Shaw I
thought mr. Shaw was dead add to that
the admission is by the Central
Intelligence Agency of their close
continuing relationship with a shot back
to eight years before this period is one
he was involved that being given we have
the documents we have the testimony how
can you sit here since you don't know
anything about that and say
categorically as you did oz wolf had no
relationship the CIA but I'm saying is
based on us or I'd make a hypothesis
based on the facts available to me and I
say that I'm convinced that he was not
obviously there could be some super
operation and they're not going to come
tell Dave Phillips about it I say I am
convinced on the evidence available to
me and I do not buy the idea that
because there was a connection between
Clay Shaw and the CIA if there was one
and Lee Harvey Oswald that necessarily
proves that the see I used clay Shaw to
do this I really had thought that all
the Clay Shaw business had been
considered by nearly all serious critics
as just something that we didn't
consider anymore
Lauren should we haven't gone to those
other CIA conduits from the Harvey
Oswald but just this one if you're not
coming with that body of evidence and I
don't think you should be traveling
around the country saying the CIA no
contact the disclaimer no I am NOT going
to say that I'll do that because I think
I'll consult two brothers who are
lawyers first one reason being that I
have five kids as in through college and
I couldn't afford the cost of winning a
suit are we gonna finish or make one
final sentence okay
I feel I have to explain two things
about using the New York Times in the
Washington Post as sources today the
reason that happened was this I came
here and I had a certain idea from the
correspondent sent to me about what kind
of meeting this was going to be I walked
in this morning and watched and boy I've
got to be pretty hot this morning and
then I saw my former colleague ray Klein
leave and as I started to go up the
stairs there was almost a fight going on
and I thought this really is different
than I thought it was and when I first
started lecturing a short time ago my
lecture agent said never speak more than
55 minutes and don't ever have a drink
before you speak a lot of cited I've got
her to two things go back to my room and
have a good drink and get some newspaper
clippings because I made up my mind that
I would not attack you personally no I
brought them with me
I brought the women
I really don't I don't understand that
you see there's something wrong in
knowing that you're gonna go across the
country to debate a ban and not bring a
newspaper clipping that you have about
it
finally I ought to say one thing I have
not said that there was not a conspiracy
to kill Jack Kennedy the statement was
made earlier by Mark himself quoting my
book I've been talking about those
things I know about and what I'm
convinced I don't know what happened
what I'm trying to say today is let's
find out the investigation has now been
going on for almost a year and in the
meantime let's don't do it with
gamesmanship may we thank our
participants
[Music]
what that was a spirited bait